---
layout: post
title: "FiPhA: An Open-Source Platform for Fiber Photometry Analysis"
category: research
authors: "Matthew F. Bridge, Leslie R. Wilson,  <b>Sambit Panda</b>, Korey D. Stevanovic, Ayland C. Letsinger, Sandra J. McBride, Jesse D. Cushman"
journal: bioRxiv
links:
- "bioRxiv: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.07.21.550098v2.full.pdf"
tags: articles
---

## Abstract

**Significance:** Fiber photometry is a widely used technique in modern behavioral neuroscience, employing genetically encoded fluorescent sensors to monitor neural activity and neurotransmitter release in awake-behaving animals, However, analyzing photometry data can be both laborious and time-consuming.

**Aim:** We propose the FiPhA (Fiber Photometry Analysis) app, which is a general-purpose fiber photometry analysis application. The goal is to develop a pipeline suitable for a wide range of photometry approaches, including spectrally resolved, camera-based, and lock-in demodulation. 

**Approach:** FiPhA was developed using the R Shiny framework and offers interactive visualization, quality control, and batch processing functionalities in a user-friendly interface.

**Results:** This application simplifies and streamlines the analysis process, thereby reducing labor and time requirements. It offers interactive visualizations, event-triggered average processing, powerful tools for filtering behavioral events and quality control features. 

**Conclusions:** FiPhA is a valuable tool for behavioral neuroscientists working with discrete, event-based fiber photometry data. It addresses the challenges associated with analyzing and investigating such data, offering a robust and user-friendly solution without the complexity of having to hand-design custom analysis pipelines. This application thus helps standardize an approach to fiber photometry analysis.

## Citation

```
@article{bridge2023fipha,
  title={FiPhA: An Open-Source Platform for Fiber Photometry Analysis},
  author={Bridge, Matthew Flectcher and Wilson, Leslie Rae and Panda, Sambit and Stevanovic, Korey Daniel and Letsinger, Ayland Cash and McBride, Sandra Jean and Cushman, Jesse D},
  journal={bioRxiv},
  pages={2023--07},
  year={2023},
  publisher={Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory}
}
```